---
layout: post
title:  "Land Cover Change from the 2020 Midwest Derecho"
date:   2024-11-25T00:00:00-00:00
author: Emily Barbini
cover: "/assets/gis/2020derechoradar.png"
categories: Arizona
---

<h2>Synopsis and Abstract</h2>
<p>On August 10th, 2020, a long-lived, line of thunderstorms known as a derecho ravaged through the Midwestern United States. While derechos are prolific producers of damaging winds, this particular system generated wind gusts of 140mph at its peak intensity. In addition, As a result, over $11 billion dollars in damages were incurred from Nebraska to Indiana, alongside many injuries and four deaths (National Weather Service, 2020). Ever since its inception, the field of Remote Sensing has proved vital to meteorologists all across the sector. In addition to RADAR technology, satellite imagery has played a key role in operational duties such as forecasting and issuing warnings. It also serves as a tool to find areas impacted by storms that may have moved through gaps in radar and/or storm-spotter networks. Few studies have performed an in-depth exploration of the usefulness of imagery from satellites such as Landsat and Sentinel, especially regarding storm damage in the immediate aftermath. The 2020 Midwest Derecho caused widespread, severe damage to crops, hence its effects can be detected via satellite imagery. This project seeks to find a "scar" left behind by the storm in Landsat 8 imagery and compare it to the approximation found in the NWS Damage Assessment Toolkit. To maintain simplicity, only the area where the storm was at its peak will be analyzed. Now, with the increased temporal frequency granted by Landsat 8 and 9, meteorologists in the National Weather Service can obtain an image more quickly to possibly detect areas left unsurveyed in the wake of any severe thunderstorm event.</p>  

<hr>

<h2>Project Goals</h2>
<p>The project goals are as follows: </p>
<ol>
	<li>View landscape changes as a result of the storm, particularly where it was at its peak intensity.</li>
	<li>Note the agricultural areas that were hit hardest.</li>
	<li>Analyze the</li>
</ol>

<hr>

<h2>Process</h2>
<p>Due to the unique location of the study area, this process involves four Landsat 8 images. This, an eastern image and a western image are necessary to analyze the land cover before and after the storm.</p>

<p>The steps to process the images taken before and after the storm are as follows: </p>
<ol>
	<li>Obtain Landsat 8, Collection 2, Level 2 Imagery of Eastern Iowa via the USGS EarthExplorer site. If necessary, collect an additional image to supplement any images that have some cloud cover. </li>
	<li>Use ArcGIS Pro to create an extent shapefile.</li>
	<li>Use R to create a workflow similar to Lab 4 to mask clouds from the images.</li>
	<li>Normalize any supplemental images. </li>
	<li>Normalize the eastern image to the western image.</li>
	<li>If applicable, use an if-else statement to fill in the NAN values on the normalized original images, using the normalized supplemental images.</li>
	<li>Open the extent shapefile in R to crop the normalized images.</li>
	<li>Save the cropped, normalized images as multiband raster .TIF files.</li>
	<li>Create a separate R script to calculate indices such as NDVI for both images.</li>
	<li>Analyze the differences between the before and after images.</li>
	<li>Use ArcGIS Pro to obtain 30 supervised classification samples for each of the 6 classes- Water, Urban, Healthy Vegetation, Unhealthy Vegetation, Trees and Bare Soil. Export each set of samples as a shapefile.</li>
	<li>Run the Maximum Likelihood Classification function for the before and after image. Save the resulting classifications as .TIF files.</li>
	<li>Return back to R to evaluate the changes between the two with a similar workflow as Lab 10.</li>
	<li>Use the resulting change_ha.csv file to create a Sankey Diagram.</li>
	<li>Analyze land cover ch</li>
</ol>

<hr>

<h2>Observations and Maps</h2>

<p>Figure I. Unaltered, Real-Color Composite Landsat 8 Images</p>

<p>Figure II. Study Area with False-Color Composite "After-Storm" Image</p>

<p>Figure III. Cropped and Normalized Landsat 8 Images</p>

<p>Figure IVa. NDVI Indices</p>

<p>Figure IVb. NBR Indices</p>

<p>Figure V. </p>
<p>Observations and Maps will be added soon!</p>

<hr>

<h2>Results</h2>

<p>Figure VI. Land Cover Classifications</p>

<p>Figure VII. Sankey Diagram</p>

<p>Figure VIII. Sankey Diagram Table</p>

<p>Figure IX. Losses in Crops</p>


<p>Results will be added soon!</p>

<hr>

<h2>Conclusion</h2>
<p>Results will be added soon!</p>

<hr>

<h2>Works Cited</h2>
<p>Adding Works Cited Soon</p>

<hr>

<h2>PDF Document</h2>
<p>PDF document will be attached soon.</p>